Some people actually make money in the stock market. Still working on that. Their predictions are actually right. Still working on that. This is why it wasn't surprising to me when I read that Michael Burry just dunked on Elon Musk in a big way. Mike, our good friend, bought Tesla puts before the stock proceeded to sell off 20%. Safe to say that position is worth quite a bit more today. 

One thing to clarify: when the media says $530 million, they're describing the notional value of the shares on the line from those put contracts. When I saw this at first, I was like, "Holy [ __ ]!" until I realized that was kind of a misrepresentation. He bought around 8,000 Tesla puts, which is still an insane position that has no doubt made a ton of money. Unfortunately, the exact details of the play aren't disclosed, but being that Tesla premium is fairly expensive, it's safe to say that was a multi-million dollar option play. 

After learning how to ball like Bill, I figured we could take a deep dive into Michael Burry's strategy, the god of Wall Street bets, the fabled Big Short degenerate. The good thing is that I really do think anyone with enough ambition could learn Michael Burry's strategy. Mike doesn't have any formal background in finance; he did get a medical degree at Vanderbilt, which is more than I'll ever do. 

Anyway, Mike adheres very strongly to the teachings of Benjamin Graham: intrinsic value, margins of safety, competitive advantages, the basics of value investing. This idea of the fabled value investing—what the [ __ ] does it even mean? After all, value has underperformed growth in the last few decades, right? Why on earth should I listen to boring—sorry, Warren Buffett—I’d rather 10x my money with Dogecoin in two days than look for undervalued plastic manufacturing companies. 

Value investing has this rigid, pretentious connotation that's been built over the last few decades. Don't take it from me; take it from the Dean of Evaluation at NYU. Things that were exclusive—being able to find the data and work with it—are no longer exclusive. I think value investing has lost its way. There are three "R" words that are used to describe value investing, and none of them are complementary. 

The first is that value investing has become incredibly rigid. It is full of things you're not supposed to do. You can't invest in stocks that don't make earnings; you can't invest in tech companies. It's also very ritualistic. There are things you're supposed to do as a value investor, and God help you if you deviate from the script. Finally, value investing has become very righteous—rather finger-wagging. 

However, Benjamin Graham, the god of value investing himself, said that a good investor evolves with the times. Value investing is just finding unrecognized value wherever it may lie. That's really it. So when we talk about Michael Burry's strategy being based on the fundamentals of value investing, all we're saying is that he looks for unrecognized value wherever it may be found. 

Quick note: this is all information I've plagiarized—borrowed from other people who actually know what they're doing. You shouldn't take my word on anything; it'd be wiser to believe Epstein killed himself. 

Price and value—two of the most fundamental ideas to consider when analyzing a stock. In a theoretical world, there is no difference between price and value. Every independent degenerate in the market buys a stock when it's priced fairly. After all, why would you buy anything that's overpriced? We, of course, know that in reality, that's not the case. Tesla's price went up 500% in less than a year. Did the company become five times more valuable between 2020 and 2021? Of course not. 

This isn't to say whether or not Tesla is a good investment; just to demonstrate the fact that price is driven by different things that are often completely disconnected from value. Throughout history in the stock market, you can see example after example after example of this—every day, everywhere, all the time. This is probably not a new idea to any of you guys. After all, we've all had to sit around for the past year and listen to that one guy who says, "Yeah, stocks are just so divorced from reality." Cool, I'll just keep 10xing my money in Dogecoin, and you can keep holding cash like a loser. 

Let's actually consider Dogecoin for a second. Is Dogecoin a good investment? If you're making money with it, then it's obviously worked so far. The problem with Dogecoin is that it's very difficult to quantify a model of both what it should be worth and its risk. If you can do that, have at it. I guarantee there are fewer people modeling Dogecoin's value than any company in the S&P. That means less competition and possibly more opportunity. 

The fundamental idea of value investing is that sometimes there are differences between price and value. Whether that's in the boomer commodities market or Dogecoin, it's the same thing. Good investors shouldn't just write off Dogecoin before even looking into it. Turbulent markets like that of Dogecoin often bring rise to inefficiency, which breeds opportunity. Instead, a good value investor like Mike might look at Dogecoin from a perspective of value and risk. 

Dogecoin's price is a product of supply and demand. Can you model how that supply and demand will change and with what degree of certainty? If you can't, maybe the opportunity is too risky. If you can, maybe you can backtest your model to see how it would have worked throughout Dogecoin's life. What I'm trying to say is that value investing is just finding discrepancies between price and value. It doesn't have to be rigid, and people that do this consistently are often looking where no one else is. 

Okay, so now we know that when there are discrepancies between price and value, opportunity arises. Well, sometimes if you're thinking logically, you might think that price should always converge with value. In a theoretical world, this makes sense. After all, why would a stock remain undervalued in a market full of people looking for undervalued investments? 

Well, just as the inefficient market creates opportunity, it can also [ __ ] you over. There's no rule that says price and value have to converge. Price and value may never meet, and unlike your boy who's nervous to meet that girl he's been looking at, you can't just give a stock four shots of tequila to help it meet value. Trust me, I tried. Price and value can come together, spread apart, or go up, down, sideways, or in [ __ ] circles. 

This brings us to another important part of value investing: finding discrepancies between price and value is only one part of the equation. The other part is recognizing value catalysts. What is going to make price meet value? Mike, when discussing his strategy in the early 2000s, claimed that catalysts aren't as important to him. Sheer outrageous value is enough. However, because it doesn't hurt to know, we'll talk about value catalysts a little later. 

First, valuation—the core of real value investing. How did Mike determine that Tesla was overvalued by a giant margin or that GameStop was undervalued by a good margin? Valuation. I have a feeling it's a lot simpler than you might think, which is both a good and bad thing. The actual process of valuing a company is fairly straightforward and can probably be learned by anyone with the internet who's willing to practice time and time again. 

Burry claims to look at EV to EBITDA as his first screen for value. EV to EBITDA is a common valuation multiple—a numerator and a denominator that allow you to look at what a company is earning relative to what the company is worth. Why do we use multiples in the stock market? Multiples like price earnings and EV to EBITDA allow you to compare things relatively—compare one business against another based on how much people are willing to pay for their earnings. 

So why does Mike like using EV to EBITDA? What the [ __ ] is EV to EBITDA? EV, or enterprise value, is a company's market cap plus total debt minus cash. But that makes absolutely no sense. Why would you add debt and subtract cash? That's what happened when I enabled Robinhood Gold, and it didn't turn out so well. So why would we value a company that way? 

Put simply, enterprise value is a more complete measure of the value of a company's operations because it factors in both debt and equity compared to something like market cap, which only considers the value of a company's shares. I still have no idea what you're talking about. CEO man makes company; he raises some money through selling shares of the company. This is called equity. He also issues bonds; this is called debt. He uses both to go out and buy stuff for the business. But he has a little cash left over. We subtract that cash because it's not a working part of the business. 

Think about this scenario: let's say instead of buying stuff with the money he raised from both debt and equity, he just keeps it as cash. What's the operational value of the business now? Zero. What about EBITDA, the other half of the EV to EBITDA multiple? EBITDA stands for earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization. Once again, like enterprise value, it's just a measure that works to try to understand a business's profitability better than something like net income can. 

I would recommend learning about why investors like these different measures, but for the sake of understanding Burry's strategy, EV to EBITDA is just a valuation multiple that allows you to compare different businesses against one another based on how confident people are in the company. Mike basically uses EV to EBITDA as a screen to help find companies that might be trading below their industry average. 

If you're trying to screen for stocks like Mike, here's some practical advice: you can go on a website called TradingView. If you're interested in investing and trading, this is one of the best free resources out there. If you're just screening for stocks to research, you definitely don't need to upgrade beyond this free account. Then you can click up here on screeners, go to stock screener, then go to this filters tab on the right. They have literally every single filter you could ever want, all for free. If you go down on the left-hand side, you can see EV to EBITDA. 

Then think about what industry you're interested in looking at. It's important to remember that multiples like EV to EBITDA are only high or low relative to something else—usually the industry average or another similar company. Take the mining industry; it has an average EV to EBITDA of 15. We can put this back into our screener on TradingView and select the industry we're trying to look at. Now we have a list of potential companies that are valued below the industry EV to EBITDA multiple. 

This is actually the exact strategy Mike used to screen for stocks, according to that interview from the early 2000s. However, it's really just a convenient starting point for your analysis. Valuation is only one piece of a big complicated puzzle. While multiples like EV to EBITDA are good at telling you the relative value of something, understanding a complete view of the business is arguably even more important. 

Let's just talk about the business first. We'll talk about that in an upcoming video. Business is business. None of us know the true business. One of my biggest obstacles in business was business. A lot of people, that being said, as far as a starting point, using a screener like this and looking at valuation multiples is probably not a bad idea. 

To recap, value catalysts are things that push price to converge with value. I mentioned earlier that Mike doesn't care too much about value catalysts. I think the reason is because they're largely a complete leap of faith. No one outside, potentially a few insiders, knows what's going to happen in the future. The world is incredibly unpredictable, which is what makes investing very hard. You can find the value play of a lifetime, but if other people don't recognize it, price and value may never meet. 

So instead, Michael Burry tries to find opportunities with sheer outrageous value. However, if you did want to understand the value catalysts of your company, it's actually not that hard to do. Take a look at your stock's all-time chart. You'll probably notice some up periods and some down periods—sometimes when the stock rallied a lot or tanked. If you use Google, you can search different date ranges for articles and news within those time periods. This allows you to look at what historically has caused the share price to go up or down. 

Mike doesn't put too much emphasis on this within his strategy, but it can't hurt to know. The Big Short, Mike's GameStop play, him dunking on Elon—it's fair to say he has a decent understanding of the stonk market and where opportunity lies. The man has made an absolutely obscene amount of money doing this stuff. 

Some other tips he provides: holding around 15 to 20 stocks is a good amount of diversification. Preserving money is Mike's main goal, and diversification not only protects you against losing money but also against making bad emotional decisions in volatile markets. 

In conclusion, value investing is not bulletproof. However, it's a strategy that's been used by the greatest investors for decades, and though its definition may be changing, as a strategy, I don't think it will ever go away. One last thing from Mike that I think we should keep in mind: using five to one leverage to get jacked to the tits and only a few positions is—oh yeah, yeah, never mind, that was Bill.